He shuffled uneasily, but took no further notice of the call.  Leaning
with both his elbows on the balustrade of the verandah, he went on
looking fixedly at the great river that flowed--indifferent and
hurried--before his eyes.  He liked to look at it about the time of
sunset; perhaps because at that time the sinking sun would spread a
glowing gold tinge on the waters of the Pantai, and Almayer's thoughts
were often busy with gold; gold he had failed to secure; gold the others
had secured--dishonestly, of course--or gold he meant to secure yet,
through his own honest exertions, for himself and Nina.  He absorbed He shuffled uneasily, but took no further notice of the call.  Leaning
with both his elbows on the balustrade of the verandah, he went on
looking fixedly at the great river that flowed--indifferent and
hurried--before his eyes.  He liked to look at it about the time of
sunset; perhaps because at that time the sinking sun would spread a
glowing gold tinge on the waters of the Pantai, and Almayer's thoughts
were often busy with gold; gold he had failed to secure; gold the others
had secured--dishonestly, of course--or gold he meant to secure yet,
through his own honest exertions, for himself and Nina.  He absorbed
himself in his dream of wealth and power away from this coast where he
had dwelt for so many years, forgetting the bitterness of toil and strife
in the vision of a great and splendid reward.  They would live in Europe,
Macassar!  Almayer's quickened fancy distanced the tree on its imaginary
voyage, but his memory lagging behind some twenty years or more in point
of time saw a young and slim Almayer, clad all in white and
modest-looking, landing from the Dutch mail-boat on the dusty jetty of
Macassar, coming to woo fortune in the godowns of old Hudig.  It was an
important epoch in his life, the beginning of a new existence for him.
His father, a subordinate official employed in the Botanical Gardens of
Buitenzorg, was no doubt delighted to place his son in such a firm.  The
young man himself too was nothing loth to leave the poisonous shores of
Java, and the meagre comforts of the parental bungalow, where the father
grumbled all day at the stupidity of native gardeners, and the mother
from the depths of her long easy-chair bewailed the lost glories of
Amsterdam, where she had been brought up, and of her position as the
daughter of a cigar dealer there.
Macassar!  Almayer's quickened fancy distanced the tree on its imaginary
voyage, but his memory lagging behind some twenty years or more in point
of time saw a young and slim Almayer, clad all in white and
modest-looking, landing from the Dutch mail-boat on the dusty jetty of
Macassar, coming to woo fortune in the godowns of old Hudig.  It was an
important epoch in his life, the beginning of a new existence for him.
His father, a subordinate official employed in the Botanical Gardens of
Buitenzorg, was no doubt delighted to place his son in such a firm.  The
young man himself too was nothing loth to leave the poisonous shores of
Java, and the meagre comforts of the parental bungalow, where the father
grumbled all day at the stupidity of native gardeners, and the mother
from the depths of her long easy-chair bewailed the lost glories of
Amsterdam, where she had been brought up, and of her position as the
daughter of a cigar dealer there.
Macassar!  Almayer's quickened fancy distanced the tree on its imaginary
voyage, but his memory lagging behind some twenty years or more in point
of time saw a young and slim Almayer, clad all in white and
modest-looking, landing from the Dutch mail-boat on the dusty jetty of
Macassar, coming to woo fortune in the godowns of old Hudig.  It was an
important epoch in his life, the beginning of a new existence for him.
His father, a subordinate official employed in the Botanical Gardens of
Buitenzorg, was no doubt delighted to place his son in such a firm.  The
young man himself too was nothing loth to leave the poisonous shores of
Java, and the meagre comforts of the parental bungalow, where the father
grumbled all day at the stupidity of native gardeners, and the mother
from the depths of her long easy-chair bewailed the lost glories of
Amsterdam, where she had been brought up, and of her position as the
daughter of a cigar dealer there.
Macassar!  Almayer's quickened fancy distanced the tree on its imaginary
voyage, but his memory lagging behind some twenty years or more in point
of time saw a young and slim Almayer, clad all in white and
modest-looking, landing from the Dutch mail-boat on the dusty jetty of
Macassar, coming to woo fortune in the godowns of old Hudig.  It was an
important epoch in his life, the beginning of a new existence for him.
His father, a subordinate official employed in the Botanical Gardens of
Buitenzorg, was no doubt delighted to place his son in such a firm.  The
young man himself too was nothing loth to leave the poisonous shores of
Java, and the meagre comforts of the parental bungalow, where the father
grumbled all day at the stupidity of native gardeners, and the mother
from the depths of her long easy-chair bewailed the lost glories of
Amsterdam, where she had been brought up, and of her position as the
daughter of a cigar dealer there.
Macassar!  Almayer's quickened fancy distanced the tree on its imaginary
voyage, but his memory lagging behind some twenty years or more in point
of time saw a young and slim Almayer, clad all in white and
modest-looking, landing from the Dutch mail-boat on the dusty jetty of
Macassar, coming to woo fortune in the godowns of old Hudig.  It was an
important epoch in his life, the beginning of a new existence for him.
His father, a subordinate official employed in the Botanical Gardens of
Buitenzorg, was no doubt delighted to place his son in such a firm.  The
young man himself too was nothing loth to leave the poisonous shores of
Java, and the meagre comforts of the parental bungalow, where the father
grumbled all day at the stupidity of native gardeners, and the mother
from the depths of her long easy-chair bewailed the lost glories of
Amsterdam, where she had been brought up, and of her position as the
daughter of a cigar dealer there.
Macassar!  Almayer's quickened fancy distanced the tree on its imaginary
voyage, but his memory lagging behind some twenty years or more in point
of time saw a young and slim Almayer, clad all in white and
modest-looking, landing from the Dutch mail-boat on the dusty jetty of
Macassar, coming to woo fortune in the godowns of old Hudig.  It was an
important epoch in his life, the beginning of a new existence for him.
His father, a subordinate official employed in the Botanical Gardens of
Buitenzorg, was no doubt delighted to place his son in such a firm.  The
young man himself too was nothing loth to leave the poisonous shores of
Java, and the meagre comforts of the parental bungalow, where the father
grumbled all day at the stupidity of native gardeners, and the mother
from the depths of her long easy-chair bewailed the lost glories of
Amsterdam, where she had been brought up, and of her position as the
daughter of a cigar dealer there.After those twenty years, standing in the close and stifling heat of a
Bornean evening, he recalled with pleasurable regret the image of Hudig's
lofty and cool warehouses with their long and straight avenues of gin
cases and bales of Manchester goods; the big door swinging noiselessly;
the dim light of the place, so delightful after the glare of the streets;
the little railed-off spaces amongst piles of merchandise where the
Chinese clerks, neat, cool, and sad-eyed, wrote rapidly and in silence
amidst the din of the working gangs rolling casks or shifting cases to a
muttered song, ending with a desperate yell.  At the upper end, facing
the great door, there was a larger space railed off, well lighted; there
the noise was subdued by distance, and above it rose the soft and
continuous clink of silver guilders which other discreet Chinamen were
counting and piling up under the supervision of Mr. Vinck, the cashier,
the genius presiding in the place--the right hand of the Master.After a year or so Lingard, having been brought often in contact with
Almayer in the course of business, took a sudden and, to the onlookers, a
rather inexplicable fancy to the young man.  He sang his praises, late at
night, over a convivial glass to his cronies in the Sunda Hotel, and one
fine morning electrified Vinck by declaring that he must have "that young
fellow for a supercargo.  Kind of captain's clerk.  Do all my
quill-driving for me."  Hudig consented.  Almayer, with youth's natural
craving for change, was nothing loth, and packing his few belongings,
started in the _Flash_ on one of those long cruises when the old seaman
was wont to visit almost every island in the archipelago.  Months slipped
by, and Lingard's friendship seemed to increase.  Often pacing the deck
with Almayer, when the faint night breeze, heavy with aromatic
exhalations of the islands, shoved the brig gently along under the
peaceful and sparkling sky, did the old seaman open his heart to his
entranced listener.  He spoke of his past life, of escaped dangers, of
big profits in his trade, of new combinations that were in the future to
bring profits bigger still.  Often he had mentioned his daughter, the
girl found in the pirate prau, speaking of her with a strange assumption
of fatherly tenderness.  "She must be a big girl now," he used to say.
"It's nigh unto four years since I have seen her!  Damme, Almayer, if I
don't think we will run into Sourabaya this trip."  And after such a
declaration he always dived into his cabin muttering to himself,
"Something must be done--must be done."  More than once he would astonish
Almayer by walking up to him rapidly, clearing his throat with a powerful
"Hem!" as if he was going to say something, and then turning abruptly
away to lean over the bulwarks in silence, and watch, motionless, for
hours, the gleam and sparkle of the phosphorescent sea along the ship's
side.  It was the night before arriving in Sourabaya when one of those
attempts at confidential communication succeeded.  After clearing his
throat he spoke.  He spoke to some purpose.  He wanted Almayer to marry
his adopted daughter.  "And don't you kick because you're white!" he
shouted, suddenly, not giving the surprised young man the time to say a
word.  "None of that with me!  Nobody will see the colour of your wife's
skin.  The dollars are too thick for that, I tell you!  And mind you,
they will be thicker yet before I die.  There will be millions, Kaspar!
Millions I say!  And all for her--and for you, if you do what you are
told."After a year or so Lingard, having been brought often in contact with
Almayer in the course of business, took a sudden and, to the onlookers, a
rather inexplicable fancy to the young man.  He sang his praises, late at
night, over a convivial glass to his cronies in the Sunda Hotel, and one
fine morning electrified Vinck by declaring that he must have "that young
fellow for a supercargo.  Kind of captain's clerk.  Do all my
quill-driving for me."  Hudig consented.  Almayer, with youth's natural
craving for change, was nothing loth, and packing his few belongings,
started in the _Flash_ on one of those long cruises when the old seaman
was wont to visit almost every island in the archipelago.  Months slipped
by, and Lingard's friendship seemed to increase.  Often pacing the deck
with Almayer, when the faint night breeze, heavy with aromatic
exhalations of the islands, shoved the brig gently along under the
peaceful and sparkling sky, did the old seaman open his heart to his
entranced listener.  He spoke of his past life, of escaped dangers, of
big profits in his trade, of new combinations that were in the future to
bring profits bigger still.  Often he had mentioned his daughter, the
girl found in the pirate prau, speaking of her with a strange assumption
of fatherly tenderness.  "She must be a big girl now," he used to say.
"It's nigh unto four years since I have seen her!  Damme, Almayer, if I
don't think we will run into Sourabaya this trip."  And after such a
declaration he always dived into his cabin muttering to himself,
"Something must be done--must be done."  More than once he would astonish
Almayer by walking up to him rapidly, clearing his throat with a powerful
"Hem!" as if he was going to say something, and then turning abruptly
away to lean over the bulwarks in silence, and watch, motionless, for
hours, the gleam and sparkle of the phosphorescent sea along the ship's
side.  It was the night before arriving in Sourabaya when one of those
attempts at confidential communication succeeded.  After clearing his
throat he spoke.  He spoke to some purpose.  He wanted Almayer to marry
his adopted daughter.  "And don't you kick because you're white!" he
shouted, suddenly, not giving the surprised young man the time to say a
word.  "None of that with me!  Nobody will see the colour of your wife's
skin.  The dollars are too thick for that, I tell you!  And mind you,
they will be thicker yet before I die.  There will be millions, Kaspar!
Millions I say!  And all for her--and for you, if you do what you are
told."After a year or so Lingard, having been brought often in contact with
Almayer in the course of business, took a sudden and, to the onlookers, a
rather inexplicable fancy to the young man.  He sang his praises, late at
night, over a convivial glass to his cronies in the Sunda Hotel, and one
fine morning electrified Vinck by declaring that he must have "that young
fellow for a supercargo.  Kind of captain's clerk.  Do all my
quill-driving for me."  Hudig consented.  Almayer, with youth's natural
craving for change, was nothing loth, and packing his few belongings,
started in the _Flash_ on one of those long cruises when the old seaman
was wont to visit almost every island in the archipelago.  Months slipped
by, and Lingard's friendship seemed to increase.  Often pacing the deck
with Almayer, when the faint night breeze, heavy with aromatic
exhalations of the islands, shoved the brig gently along under the
peaceful and sparkling sky, did the old seaman open his heart to his
entranced listener.  He spoke of his past life, of escaped dangers, of
big profits in his trade, of new combinations that were in the future to
bring profits bigger still.  Often he had mentioned his daughter, the
girl found in the pirate prau, speaking of her with a strange assumption
of fatherly tenderness.  "She must be a big girl now," he used to say.
"It's nigh unto four years since I have seen her!  Damme, Almayer, if I
don't think we will run into Sourabaya this trip."  And after such a
declaration he always dived into his cabin muttering to himself,
"Something must be done--must be done."  More than once he would astonish
Almayer by walking up to him rapidly, clearing his throat with a powerful
"Hem!" as if he was going to say something, and then turning abruptly
away to lean over the bulwarks in silence, and watch, motionless, for
hours, the gleam and sparkle of the phosphorescent sea along the ship's
side.  It was the night before arriving in Sourabaya when one of those
attempts at confidential communication succeeded.  After clearing his
throat he spoke.  He spoke to some purpose.  He wanted Almayer to marry
his adopted daughter.  "And don't you kick because you're white!" he
shouted, suddenly, not giving the surprised young man the time to say a
word.  "None of that with me!  Nobody will see the colour of your wife's
skin.  The dollars are too thick for that, I tell you!  And mind you,
they will be thicker yet before I die.  There will be millions, Kaspar!
Millions I say!  And all for her--and for you, if you do what you are
told."In the middle of the verandah there was a round table.  On it a paraffin
lamp without a globe shed a hard glare on the three inner sides.  The
fourth side was open, and faced the river.  Between the rough supports of
the high-pitched roof hung torn rattan screens.  There was no ceiling,
and the harsh brilliance of the lamp was toned above into a soft half-
light that lost itself in the obscurity amongst the rafters.  The front
wall was cut in two by the doorway of a central passage closed by a red
curtain.  The women's room opened into that passage, which led to the
back courtyard and to the cooking shed.  In one of the side walls there
was a doorway.  Half obliterated words--"Office: Lingard and Co."--were
still legible on the dusty door, which looked as if it had not been
opened for a very long time.  Close to the other side wall stood a bent-
wood rocking-chair, and by the table and about the verandah four wooden
armchairs straggled forlornly, as if ashamed of their shabby
surroundings.  A heap of common mats lay in one corner, with an old
hammock slung diagonally above.  In the other corner, his head wrapped in
a piece of red calico, huddled into a shapeless heap, slept a Malay, one
of Almayer's domestic slaves--"my own people," he used to call them.  A
numerous and representative assembly of moths were holding high revels
round the lamp to the spirited music of swarming mosquitoes.  Under the
palm-leaf thatch lizards raced on the beams calling softly.  A monkey,
chained to one of the verandah supports--retired for the night under the
eaves--peered and grinned at Almayer, as it swung to one of the bamboo
roof sticks and caused a shower of dust and bits of dried leaves to
settle on the shabby table.  The floor was uneven, with many withered
plants and dried earth scattered about.  A general air of squalid neglect
pervaded the place.  Great red stains on the floor and walls testified to
frequent and indiscriminate betel-nut chewing.  The light breeze from the
river swayed gently the tattered blinds, sending from the woods opposite
a faint and sickly perfume as of decaying flowers.Almayer spoke jovially and dropped with a contented sigh into the
armchair nearest to the table.  Nina Almayer came through the curtained
doorway followed by an old Malay woman, who busied herself in setting
upon the table a plateful of rice and fish, a jar of water, and a bottle
half full of genever.  After carefully placing before her master a
cracked glass tumbler and a tin spoon she went away noiselessly.  Nina
stood by the table, one hand lightly resting on its edge, the other
hanging listlessly by her side.  Her face turned towards the outer
darkness, through which her dreamy eyes seemed to see some entrancing
picture, wore a look of impatient expectancy.  She was tall for a half-
caste, with the correct profile of the father, modified and strengthened
by the squareness of the lower part of the face inherited from her
maternal ancestors--the Sulu pirates.  Her firm mouth, with the lips
slightly parted and disclosing a gleam of white teeth, put a vague
suggestion of ferocity into the impatient expression of her features.  And
yet her dark and perfect eyes had all the tender softness of expression
common to Malay women, but with a gleam of superior intelligence; they
looked gravely, wide open and steady, as if facing something invisible to
all other eyes, while she stood there all in white, straight, flexible,
graceful, unconscious of herself, her low but broad forehead crowned with
a shining mass of long black hair that fell in heavy tresses over her
shoulders, and made her pale olive complexion look paler still by the
contrast of its coal-black hue.The light night breeze fanned the brig gently to the southward, and the
great blaze of light got smaller and smaller till it twinkled only on the
horizon like a setting star.  It set: the heavy canopy of smoke reflected
the glare of hidden flames for a short time and then disappeared also.